Project management is the process of leading the work of a team to achieve all project goals
within the given constraints.[1] This information is usually described in project documentation,
created at the beginning of the development process. The primary constraints are scope, time, and
budget.
[2] The secondary challenge is to optimize the allocation of necessary inputs and apply them
to meet pre-defined objectives.
The objective of project management is to produce a complete project which complies with the
client's objectives. In many cases, the objective of project management is also to shape or reform
the client's brief to feasibly address the client's objectives. Once the client's objectives are clearly
established, they should influence all decisions made by other people involved in the project – for
example, project managers, designers, contractors, and subcontractors. Ill-defined or too tightly
prescribed project management objectives are detrimental to decision-making.
A project is a temporary and unique endeavor designed to produce a product, service, or result
with a defined beginning and end (usually time-constrained, and often constrained by funding or
staffing) undertaken to meet unique goals and objectives, typically to bring about beneficial change
or added value.[3][4] The temporary nature of projects stands in contrast with business as usual (or
operations),
[5] which are repetitive, permanent, or semi-permanent functional activities to produce
products or services. In practice, the management of such distinct production approaches requires
the development of distinct technical skills and management strategies.[6]

Until 1900, civil engineering projects were generally managed by creative architects, engineers,
and master builders themselves, for example, Vitruvius (first century BC), Christopher Wren
(1632–1723), Thomas Telford (1757–1834), and Isambard Kingdom Brunel (1806–1859).[7]
In the
1950s, organizations started to apply project-management tools and techniques more
systematically to complex engineering projects.[8]
As a discipline, project management developed from several fields of
application including civil construction, engineering, and heavy
defense activity.[9] Two forefathers of project management are Henry
Gantt, called the father of planning and control techniques,[10] who is
famous for his use of the Gantt chart as a project management tool
(alternatively Harmonogram first proposed by Karol Adamiecki);[11]
and Henri Fayol for his creation of the five management functions that
form the foundation of the body of knowledge associated with project
and program management.[12] Both Gantt and Fayol were students of
Frederick Winslow Taylor's theories of scientific management. His
work is the forerunner to modern project management tools including
work breakdown structure (WBS) and resource allocation.
The 1950s marked the beginning of the modern project management
era, where core engineering fields came together to work as one.
Project management became recognized as a distinct discipline arising
from the management discipline with the engineering model.[13] In the United States, prior to the
1950s, projects were managed on an ad-hoc basis, using mostly Gantt charts and informal techniques and tools. At that time, two mathematical project-scheduling models were developed.
The critical path method (CPM) was developed as a joint venture between DuPont Corporation and
Remington Rand Corporation for managing plant maintenance projects. The program evaluation
and review technique (PERT), was developed by the U.S. Navy Special Projects Office in
conjunction with the Lockheed Corporation and Booz Allen Hamilton as part of the Polaris missile
submarine program.[14]
PERT and CPM are very similar in their approach but still present some differences. CPM is used
for projects that assume deterministic activity times; the times at which each activity will be
carried out are known. PERT, on the other hand, allows for stochastic activity times; the times at
which each activity will be carried out are uncertain or varied. Because of this core difference, CPM
and PERT are used in different contexts. These mathematical techniques quickly spread into many
private enterprises.
At the same time, as project-scheduling models were being
developed, technology for project cost estimating, cost
management and engineering economics was evolving, with
pioneering work by Hans Lang and others. In 1956, the
American Association of Cost Engineers (now AACE
International; the Association for the Advancement of Cost
Engineering) was formed by early practitioners of project
management and the associated specialties of planning and
scheduling, cost estimating, and project control. AACE
continued its pioneering work and in 2006, released the first
integrated process for portfolio, program, and project
management (total cost management framework).
In 1969, the Project Management Institute (PMI) was formed in the USA.[15] PMI publishes the
original version of A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK Guide) in
1996 with William Duncan as its primary author, which describes project management practices
that are common to "most projects, most of the time."

